#summary How to build Unladen Swallow on Windows

Contributed by Baptiste Lepilleur:

{{{
Below are the build instructions for Unladden Swallow on Windows with
Microsoft Visual Studio 2008. I could not find them, and it would have
saved a few minutes poking around...

Short build instructions: before building python, llvm need to be
compiled. You must generate MSVS solution using cmake in directory Util
\llvm\obj, then build the Release and Debug configurations (plan about
30mn for building llvm). Then proceed as usual to build python using
the PCBuild/PCBuild.sln solution.

Notes: if you copy the python binary/dll in another directory, you
also need to copy python26.bc found in the PCBuild directory.

Detailed instructions (command-dump):

You need to install cmake (http://cmake.org/) and make sure cmake.exe
is in the path (or adapt the commands below). I tested with cmake 2.6.

> cd Util\llvm

Util\llvm> mkdir obj

Util\llvm> cd obj

Util\llvm\obj> cmake -G "Visual Studio 9 2008" ..
-- Check for working C compiler: cl
-- Check for working C compiler: cl -- works
...
-- Configuring done
-- Generating done
-- Build files have been written to: E:/prg/thirdparties/unladden/Util/
llvm/obj

Util\llvm\obj>%VS90COMNTOOLS%\vsvars32.bat
Setting environment for using Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 x86 tools.

Util\llvm\obj>vcbuild /M%NUMBER_OF_PROCESSORS% LLVM.sln "Release|
Win32"
...
181>ALL_BUILD - up-to-date
Skipped building project E:\prg\thirdparties\unladden\Util\llvm\obj\.
\INSTALL.vcproj for solution configuration RELEASE|WIN32. This project
is excluded from build for this solution configuration.

Build complete: 91 Projects succeeded, 0 Projects failed, 26 Projects
skipped

Util\llvm\obj>vcbuild /M%NUMBER_OF_PROCESSORS% LLVM.sln "Debug|WIN32"
...
181>Build started: Project: ALL_BUILD, Configuration: Debug|Win32
181>ALL_BUILD - up-to-date
Skipped building project E:\prg\thirdparties\unladden\Util\llvm\obj\.
\INSTALL.vcproj for solution configuration DEBUG|WIN32. This project
is excluded from build for this solution configuration.

Build complete: 91 Projects succeeded, 0 Projects failed, 26 Projects
skipped
---

Then open python solution found in PCBuild/PCBuild.sln and build as
usual.

Notes: you will need to regenerate the llvm solution (cmake -G step)
if you move the source around. The generated solution contains hard-
coded paths.
}}}