#summary Patches Unladen Swallow has pushed to various upstream projects

= CPython =

== Patches reviewed, submitted ==
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5665 Issue 5665]. Add more tests for pickling, including backwards-compatibility tests.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5588 Issue 5588]. Add --randseed to regrtest.py.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5176 Issue 5176]. Special-case string formatting in BINARY_MODULO implementation.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue4884 Issue 4884]. Work around gethostbyaddr_r bug.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue4597 Issue 4597]. EvalFrameEx fails to set 'why' for some exceptions.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue4477 Issue 4477]. Speed up PyEval_EvalFrameEx when tracing is off.

== Patches under review ==
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5683 Issue 5683]. Speed up cPickle's pickling generally via a simplified buffering scheme.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5671 Issue 5671]. Improve performance of cPickle when pickling lists.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5670 Issue 5670]. Improve performance of cPickle when pickling dicts.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5575 Issue 5575]. Add env vars for controlling building sqlite, hashlib and ssl.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5572 Issue 5572]. Make distutils correctly use the LIBS configure env var.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5372 Issue 5372]. Fix distutils to not inappropriately reuse .o files between extension modules.
  * [http://bugs.python.org/issue5362 Issue 5362]. Add configure option to disable Py3k warnings.


= LLVM =

== Patches reviewed, submitted ==
  * [http://llvm.org/viewvc/llvm-project?view=rev&revision=70084 r70084]. Add a new TypeBuilder helper class, which eases making LLVM IR types.
  * [http://llvm.org/viewvc/llvm-project?view=rev&revision=69958 r69958]. Add ConstantInt::getSigned().
  * [http://llvm.org/viewvc/llvm-project?view=rev&revision=68768 r68768]. Add a CreatePtrDiff() method to IRBuilder.
  * [http://llvm.org/viewvc/llvm-project?view=rev&revision=68277 r68277]. Fix overflow checks in SmallVector.


= Rietveld =

== Patches reviewed, submitted ==
  * [http://codereview.appspot.com/40053 Issue 40053]. Make editing a branch actually edit, rather than creating a new branch

== Patches under review ==
  * [http://codereview.appspot.com/40054 Issue 40054]. Add the ability to edit and delete repositories.
  * [http://codereview.appspot.com/40050 Issue 40050]. Make upload.py send svn cp'd and svn mv'd files correctly.